Built-in Troubleshooting Tools.
I'm going to run through a number of interface screenshots
and talk on top of them for a moment.
Then we'll turn our attention to a demo so that you can see
how to apply this theoretical knowledge.
The troubleshooting system has been in Windows for several versions,
I know I say that a lot over the course of the training,
but I want you to see the difference between what's new and what's not new.
The troubleshooting system in Windows 10,
as you can see,
you can find through the Update and Security Settings
app under the Troubleshoot tab,
and there's a number of these troubleshooters that
you can just pick from the list on, Internet Connections,
Audio, Printer, Windows Update problems,
Blue Screen, Bluetooth, etc.
You'll often find that the Windows Error Reporting subsystem
will sometimes invoke or offer a selective,
a specific, I should say, troubleshooter if you have a specific failure happen.
If you have printer failures,
you might have Windows 10 recommend automatically that
you run the printer troubleshooter.
These are pretty cool.
They're best experienced live and in person.
The idea here is that you don't necessarily have to open a support
ticket with Microsoft or bring your computer to your nearest
authorized repair shop or mom-and-pop repair shop,
as the case may be, to have your system looked at.
You may very well be able to resolve problems on your own.
If you're an IT professional,
the ability to troubleshoot Windows 10 systems
efficiently is an awfully valuable skill,
and you can become your fellow employees' best friend by
helping them restore productivity.
I mentioned Windows Error Reporting.
This runs as a service.
You see in this screenshot I'm creating a variable called e
that grabs a reference to the service,
its name is WerSvc for Windows Error Reporting Service,
and then if I pipeline the e variable to Format-List *,
I've shown you this before,
this is a way in PowerShell to get a run of all
available properties for an object.
That's really it.
I want to inject little bits of PowerShell as we go along,
because I want it to be very near the top of your list to be
comfortable and proficient in PowerShell,
because you're not going to be a Windows 10 professional
power user unless you can do this automation.
What I want to draw your attention to is the startup type.
It's manual.
The default status of the WER service is triggered Start,
which means that it will remain silent unless it's triggered into action by
a failure in some subsystem on your Windows 10 computer,
and then it will write verbose messages that you can retrieve.
Well, how can you retrieve those results, you might ask?
This is done through the classic Control Panel under
Security and Maintenance Problem Reports.
This is a pretty robust interface where,
depending upon what happened,
whether it was a Windows Update installation problem or a
process just crashed or stopped working,
you can view detailed information on that problem,
and you can send report information to the vendor if
you're working with them specifically.
I'll show you this in more detail in the demo.
Here I just want to get you familiar with the feature
and how to find it in Windows 10.
The Feedback Hub is found in Settings under Privacy, Feedback & Diagnostics.
You can be selective on how much data you send to Microsoft.
When Microsoft released Windows 10,
they received some backlash from some areas of the public who
thought that Microsoft was assuming too much in terms of what kind
of anonymized data you want to send back.
It's what called telemetry data.
The idea is, Microsoft can take this anonymized data,
they don't care about your browsing habits or what
applications you install necessarily, all that's your business,
but when a crash occurs, it's nice to be able,
Microsoft developers,
it's nice for them to be able to look at these logs from real live customers,
and that can turn into bug reports and fixes and improve the
quality of your Windows and application experience.
That having been said, you do have the ability to control your privacy,
in fact, look at that huge list across Location services,
Microphone, Speech, Account,
you can really be granular in the degree to which you're willing
to participate in this feedback gathering.
Check the exercise files, because I saw a news item just today,
I'm recording this video in January 2018,
where Microsoft is planning to add a feature to Windows 10 that
allows you to see specifically and exactly the data that goes
to Microsoft before you send it.
Very nice, I admire Microsoft for their transparency.
The Event Viewer, again, I'm going to sound like a broken record,
but it's been around forever pretty much,
predominantly in the NT line of business Windows versions,
but Event Viewer has even been in consumer Windows for a long time,
and this is where the system, which is Windows itself,
can write entries, informational entries,
warning entries, error entries, on what's happening on the machine.
The Event Viewer is a way to figure out what's happening on a system,
so it's a go-to troubleshooting source.
One common beginner issue is I can find that such and so errors are occurring,
and they're referencing a specific Event ID,
what does that Event ID actually mean, that's the question.
The good news is that just about all Event IDs,
at least as far as Windows code base is concerned, have been documented, so they're just as nearby as a quick web search.